Sums and products over arbitrary finite types (#1367)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/group-theory/products-of-tuples-of-elements-commutative-monoids.lagda.md

Reviewer: yes, that should be fine

Reviewer: Since this file is all about products of finite families of elements, rather than just tuples, I think a better name for this file is `products-finite-families-of-elements-commutative-monoids`

Reviewer: Actually, a better way to organize this is to add a second file about products of finite families of elements where you consider types `A` with a counting, or a proof that `A` is finite.

Reviewer: Don't forget to add links both ways between these files

Reviewer: @lowasser Sorry, I don't think I was entirely clear in this comment. We usually keep `count`ings and finiteness in the same file, since the latter is just a truncation of the first. I.e. the relevant definitions about `count`s can be in a subsection on the corresponding file about finite families of elements.

      do
        cA@(nA , Fin-nA≃A) ← is-finite-type-Finite-Type A
        equational-reasoning
          mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M (Σ-Finite-Type A B) (ind-Σ f)
          ＝
            mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
              ( M)
              ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type nA) (B ∘ map-equiv Fin-nA≃A))
              ( ind-Σ (f ∘ map-equiv Fin-nA≃A))
            by
              mul-equiv-finite-Commutative-Monoid
                ( M)
                ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type nA) (B ∘ map-equiv Fin-nA≃A))
                ( Σ-Finite-Type A B)
                ( equiv-Σ-equiv-base (type-Finite-Type ∘ B) Fin-nA≃A)
                ( ind-Σ f)
          ＝
            mul-count-Commutative-Monoid
              ( M)
              ( type-Finite-Type A)
              ( cA)
              ( λ a → mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M (B a) (f a))
            by
              inv
                ( mul-fin-finite-Σ-Commutative-Monoid
                  ( M)
                  ( nA)
                  ( B ∘ map-equiv Fin-nA≃A)
                  ( f ∘ map-equiv Fin-nA≃A))
          ＝
            mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
              ( M)
              ( A)

>               (λ a → mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M (B a) (f a))

Author: Indentation

open import foundation.homotopies
open import foundation.identity-types
open import foundation.negated-equality
open import foundation.propositional-truncations
open import foundation.sets
open import foundation.type-arithmetic-coproduct-types
open import foundation.type-arithmetic-empty-type
open import foundation.type-arithmetic-unit-type
open import foundation.unit-type
open import foundation.universal-property-propositional-truncation-into-sets
open import foundation.universe-levels
open import foundation.whiskering-homotopies-composition

open import group-theory.commutative-monoids
open import group-theory.monoids
open import group-theory.products-of-tuples-of-elements-monoids

open import linear-algebra.vectors-on-commutative-monoids

open import lists.lists

open import univalent-combinatorics.coproduct-types
open import univalent-combinatorics.counting
open import univalent-combinatorics.counting-dependent-pair-types
open import univalent-combinatorics.dependent-pair-types
open import univalent-combinatorics.double-counting
open import univalent-combinatorics.finite-types
open import univalent-combinatorics.standard-finite-types
```

</details>

## Idea

> The product operation extends the binary multiplication operation on a
> [commutative monoid](group-theory.commutative-monoids.md) `M` to any family of
> elements of `M` indexed by a
> [standard finite type](univalent-combinatorics.standard-finite-types.md), or to
> any [finite type](univalent-combinatorics.finite-types.md).

Reviewer: After splitting up the file:

```suggestion
We extend the binary multiplication operation on a
[commutative monoid](group-theory.commutative-monoids.md) `M` to any family of
elements of `M` indexed by a
[standard finite type](univalent-combinatorics.standard-finite-types.md).
```

Reviewer: Feel free to also try and jam in a concept macro invocation for `"product" Disambiguation="of a family of elements in a commutative monoid over a standard finite type"` if you want

## Definition

```agda
mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>   {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l) (n : ℕ) →

Reviewer: Can the natural number `n : ℕ` be made implicit in this definition?

Author: I've experimented with that in a lot of places in this PR, and it seems to pretty much never work -- I almost always have to explicitly pass the parameter anyway.  Given that, I've left the natural number arguments explicit everywhere.

Reviewer: Alright, thanks for checking anyways, and sorry for wasting your time with this.

  (functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n) → type-Commutative-Monoid M
mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M =
  mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

## Properties

### Products of one and two elements

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

>   mul-one-element-Commutative-Monoid :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  compute-mul-one-element-Commutative-Monoid :
```

    (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M 1) →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M 1 f ＝
    head-functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M 0 f
  mul-one-element-Commutative-Monoid =
    mul-one-element-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)

>   mul-two-elements-Commutative-Monoid :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  compute-mul-two-elements-Commutative-Monoid :
```

    (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M 2) →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M 2 f ＝
    mul-Commutative-Monoid M (f (zero-Fin 1)) (f (one-Fin 1))
  mul-two-elements-Commutative-Monoid =
    mul-two-elements-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

### Products are homotopy invariant

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  htpy-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>     (n : ℕ) {f g : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n} →

Reviewer: if this doesn't cause inference issues

```suggestion
    {n : ℕ} {f g : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n} →
```

    (f ~ g) →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n f ＝ mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n g
  htpy-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid =
    htpy-mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

> ### Products are equal to the zero-th term plus the rest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Products are equal to the zero-th term times the rest
```

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  cons-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>     (n : ℕ) (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M (succ-ℕ n)) →

Author: As elsewhere, causes more trouble than it's worth

    {x : type-Commutative-Monoid M} →
    head-functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n f ＝ x →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M (succ-ℕ n) f ＝
    mul-Commutative-Monoid M (mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n (f ∘ inl-Fin n)) x
  cons-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid =
    cons-mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)

  snoc-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>     (n : ℕ) (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M (succ-ℕ n)) →

Reviewer: implicit `n`

Author: As elsewhere, causes more trouble than it's worth

    {x : type-Commutative-Monoid M} → f (zero-Fin n) ＝ x →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M (succ-ℕ n) f ＝
    mul-Commutative-Monoid M
      ( x)
      ( mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n (f ∘ inr-Fin n))
  snoc-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid =
    snoc-mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

### Extending a product of elements in a monoid

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  extend-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>     (n : ℕ) (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n) →

Author: As elsewhere, causes more trouble than it's worth

    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M
      ( succ-ℕ n)
      ( cons-functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid
        ( M)
        ( n)
        ( unit-Commutative-Monoid M) f) ＝
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n f
  extend-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid =
    extend-mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

### Shifting a product of elements in a monoid

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  shift-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid :

>     (n : ℕ) (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n) →

Reviewer: implicit `n`

Author: As elsewhere, causes more trouble than it's worth

    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M
      ( succ-ℕ n)
      ( snoc-functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n f
        ( unit-Commutative-Monoid M)) ＝
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n f
  shift-mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid =
    shift-mul-fin-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

### A product of units is the unit

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  mul-fin-unit-Commutative-Monoid :
    (n : ℕ) →
    mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid
      ( M)
      ( n)
      ( zero-functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n) ＝
    unit-Commutative-Monoid M
  mul-fin-unit-Commutative-Monoid =
    mul-fin-unit-Monoid (monoid-Commutative-Monoid M)
```

> ### Splitting products

Reviewer: Can you add a short explanation of what "splitting products" means? I.e.

```text
Given an `n+m`-dimensional vector `f`, the product of its coordinates computes as...
```

      zero-ℕ _ _ = refl
    preserves-product-permutation-list-standard-transpositions-Commutative-Monoid
      (succ-ℕ n) nil f = refl
    preserves-product-permutation-list-standard-transpositions-Commutative-Monoid
      (succ-ℕ n) (cons ((i , j) , i≠j) L) f =
        preserves-product-transposition-Commutative-Monoid n i j i≠j f ∙
        preserves-product-permutation-list-standard-transpositions-Commutative-Monoid
          ( succ-ℕ n)
          ( L)
          ( f ∘ map-transposition-Fin (succ-ℕ n) i j i≠j)

    preserves-product-permutation-Commutative-Monoid :
      (n : ℕ) → (σ : Permutation n) →
      (f : functional-vec-Commutative-Monoid M n) →
      mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n f ＝
      mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n (f ∘ map-equiv σ)
    preserves-product-permutation-Commutative-Monoid n σ f =
      preserves-product-permutation-list-standard-transpositions-Commutative-Monoid
        ( n)
        ( list-standard-transpositions-permutation-Fin n σ)
        ( f) ∙
      ap
        ( λ τ → mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n (f ∘ map-equiv τ))
        ( eq-permutation-list-standard-transpositions-Fin n σ)
```

> ### Products for a count for a type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Products of families of elements over a type equipped with a counting
```

> ### Products for a count for a type

Reviewer: This subsection should be in the Definition**s*** section

Reviewer: On second thought, this should be factored to a new file.

```agda
mul-count-Commutative-Monoid :
  {l1 l2 : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l1) (A : UU l2) →
  count A → (A → type-Commutative-Monoid M) → type-Commutative-Monoid M
mul-count-Commutative-Monoid M A (n , Fin-n≃A) f =
  mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n (f ∘ map-equiv Fin-n≃A)
```

> ### Products for a count for a type are homotopy invariant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Products of families of elements over types equipped with a counting are homotopy invariant
```

  where

  abstract
    mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid :
      (f : type-Finite-Type A → type-Commutative-Monoid M) →
      mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A f ＝
      mul-count-Commutative-Monoid M (type-Finite-Type A) cA f
    mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid f =
      equational-reasoning
        mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A f
        ＝
          mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
            ( M)
            ( type-Finite-Type A , unit-trunc-Prop cA)
            ( f)
          by
            ap
              ( λ c →
                mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
                  ( M)
                  ( type-Finite-Type A , c)
                  ( f))
              ( all-elements-equal-type-trunc-Prop
                ( is-finite-type-Finite-Type A)
                ( unit-trunc-Prop cA))
        ＝ mul-count-Commutative-Monoid M (type-Finite-Type A) cA f
          by
            htpy-universal-property-set-quotient-trunc-Prop
              ( set-Commutative-Monoid M)
              ( λ c →
                mul-count-Commutative-Monoid M (type-Finite-Type A) c f)
              ( eq-mul-count-Commutative-Monoid M (type-Finite-Type A) f)
              ( cA)
```

> ### The product over an empty type is the unit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### A product over an empty type is the unit element
```

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l1) (A : Finite-Type l2)
  (H : is-empty (type-Finite-Type A))
  where

  abstract
    mul-is-empty-finite-Commutative-Monoid :
      (f : type-Finite-Type A → type-Commutative-Monoid M) →
      is-unit-Commutative-Monoid M (mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A f)
    mul-is-empty-finite-Commutative-Monoid =
      mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid M A (count-is-empty H)
```

### The product of units is the unit

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l1) (A : Finite-Type l2)
  where

  mul-finite-unit-Commutative-Monoid :
    is-unit-Commutative-Monoid
      ( M)
      ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
        ( M)
        ( A)
        ( λ _ → unit-Commutative-Monoid M))
  mul-finite-unit-Commutative-Monoid =
    let
      open
        do-syntax-trunc-Prop
          (is-unit-prop-Commutative-Monoid
            ( M)
            ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
              ( M)
              ( A)
              ( λ _ → unit-Commutative-Monoid M)))
    in do
      cA ← is-finite-type-Finite-Type A

>       mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid M A cA _ ∙
>         mul-fin-unit-Commutative-Monoid M _

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      ( mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid M A cA _ ∙
        mul-fin-unit-Commutative-Monoid M _)
```

```

### Products over a finite type are homotopy invariant

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l1) (A : Finite-Type l2)
  where

  abstract
    htpy-mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid :
      {f g : type-Finite-Type A → type-Commutative-Monoid M} →
      f ~ g →
      mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A f ＝ mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A g
    htpy-mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid {f} {g} H =
      let
        open
          do-syntax-trunc-Prop
            ( Id-Prop
              ( set-Commutative-Monoid M)
              ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A f)
              ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A g))
      in do
        cA ← is-finite-type-Finite-Type A

>         equational-reasoning

Reviewer: This is much better! Thank you for implementing this

          ( rec-coproduct (ind-Σ (f ∘ inl)) (f (inr star)) ∘
            map-coproduct
              ( id)
              ( map-left-unit-law-Σ (type-Finite-Type ∘ B ∘ inr)) ∘
            map-right-distributive-Σ-coproduct
              ( Fin n)
              ( unit)
              ( type-Finite-Type ∘ B))
        by
          mul-equiv-finite-Commutative-Monoid
            ( M)
            ( coproduct-Finite-Type
              ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type n) (B ∘ inl))
              ( B (inr star)))
            (Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type (succ-ℕ n)) B)
            ( inv-equiv
              ( equiv-coproduct
                ( id-equiv)
                ( left-unit-law-Σ (type-Finite-Type ∘ B ∘ inr)) ∘e
                right-distributive-Σ-coproduct
                  ( Fin n)
                  ( unit)
                  ( type-Finite-Type ∘ B)))
            _
      ＝
        mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
          ( M)
          ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type (succ-ℕ n)) B)
          ( ind-Σ f)
        by
          htpy-mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
            ( M)
            ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type (succ-ℕ n)) B)

>             ( λ { (inl k , b) → refl ; (inr k , b) → refl})

Reviewer: Sorry, this is currently undocumented, but we prefer the `λ where` syntax over the old pattern/matching lambda syntax:

```suggestion
            ( λ where
              (inl k , b) → refl
              (inr k , b) → refl)
```

                ( ap
                  ( λ g → mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M nB (f ∘ g))
                  ( eq-htpy
                    ( map-equiv-count-coproduct-inr-coproduct-Fin cA cB)))
          ＝
            mul-Commutative-Monoid
              ( M)
              ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A (f ∘ inl))
              ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M B (f ∘ inr))
            by
              inv
                ( ap-mul-Commutative-Monoid
                  ( M)
                  ( mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid
                    ( M)
                    ( A)
                    ( cA)
                    ( f ∘ inl))
                  ( mul-finite-count-Commutative-Monoid
                    ( M)
                    ( B)
                    ( cB)
                    ( f ∘ inr)))
      where
        open
          do-syntax-trunc-Prop
            ( Id-Prop
              ( set-Commutative-Monoid M)
              ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
                ( M)
                ( coproduct-Finite-Type A B)
                ( f))
              ( mul-Commutative-Monoid
                ( M)
                ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M A (f ∘ inl))

>                 ( mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M B (f ∘ inr))))

Reviewer: Maybe I've misunderstood the `do` syntax, but it is only relevant for the `←` lines right below the `do`-keyword above, correct? If so, don't you find it a little strange that the relevant motive we're inducting with respect to is placed so far from the variable bindings? Would it be possible to move them closer together?

Author: I do not know of any way with Agda's syntax to move them closer together.

Author: On the other hand, the previous `elim-exists` syntax kept the variable binding far away from what it was being bound to, so -- you win some, you lose some?

```

### Products distribute over dependent pair types

```agda
module _
  {l : Level} (M : Commutative-Monoid l)
  where

  abstract
    mul-fin-finite-Σ-Commutative-Monoid :
      (n : ℕ) →
      {l2 : Level} →
      (B : Fin n → Finite-Type l2) →
      (f : (k : Fin n) → type-Finite-Type (B k) → type-Commutative-Monoid M) →
      mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid M n
        (λ k → mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid M (B k) (f k)) ＝
      mul-finite-Commutative-Monoid
        M (Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type n) B) (ind-Σ f)
    mul-fin-finite-Σ-Commutative-Monoid zero-ℕ B f =
      inv
        ( mul-is-empty-finite-Commutative-Monoid
          ( M)
          ( Σ-Finite-Type (Fin-Finite-Type zero-ℕ) B)
          ( λ ())
          ( ind-Σ f))

>     mul-fin-finite-Σ-Commutative-Monoid (succ-ℕ n) B f = equational-reasoning
>       mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    mul-fin-finite-Σ-Commutative-Monoid (succ-ℕ n) B f =
      equational-reasoning
      mul-fin-Commutative-Monoid
```
